One of the most underrated qualities in today's world is modesty.
In fact, the world encourages the exact opposite of modesty.
The world says that you are the most important person.
You should promote yourself.
You have no limits.
You have the right to be anything you want to be.
As we'll see, the world's thinking is completely backwards
and for several reasons.
Really, modesty is a quality that stems from everything that is good.
Our theme scripture for this discussion is Micah 6 and Verse 8.
He has told you what is good and what is Jehovah requiring of you,
only to exercise justice, to cherish loyalty and to walk in modesty with your God.
Notice that modesty is one of the key aspects of what is good.
To help us understand why, let's discuss three questions.
What is modesty?
Why do we want to have this quality?
How can we cultivate it?
First, what is modesty?
Basically, it's an awareness of our limitations.
Of course, we often link modesty with appropriate dress and grooming.
But much more is involved.
How do we know?
Consider what we read at Proverbs 11 and verse 2.
When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow.
But wisdom is with the modest ones.
Notice that modesty is contrasted with the negative quality, presumptuousness.
A presumptuous person runs ahead without the authority to do so.
He or she ignores proper boundaries and limitations.
That kind of attitude often leads to foolish mistakes, a bad reputation with fellow humans.
And above all, it can cause a person to lose God's favor.
For example, we might think of King Saul.
Although he started out as a modest young man, in time he became presumptuous.
He even went so far as to offer up a burnt sacrifice, even though he was not authorized to do so.
As a result, Saul lost Jehovah's favor and eventually the kingship.
In Saul's case, presumptuousness definitely led to dishonor.
On the other hand, a wise and modest person recognizes his limitations and works within them.
Why is modesty the course of wisdom?
This brings us to our second main point.
Why do we want to have this quality?
The foremost reason is that modesty is essential to pleasing our Heavenly Father Jehovah.
Although we don't speak of Jehovah as being modest, even he works within certain limitations that he's imposed on himself.
He teaches us by example how to demonstrate this quality, even though it's not one that he needs to display.
Why can we say that Jehovah imposes limitations on himself?
Consider just one example.
He'll never violate the gift of free will that he's granted us.
Jehovah will never force us to serve him, even though, of course, he has the power to do so.
Aren't we grateful that he allows us to serve him because we choose to out of love and not because we are forced to?
Jehovah teaches us to display modesty in other ways as well, for example.
We might think of how he listened patiently as Abraham voiced his concerns about Jehovah's purpose to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah.
Or how Jehovah invited the angels to suggest ways to Fuehaab and then authorized one of their suggestions to be carried out.
What's the lesson for us?
If Jehovah who doesn't need input or help from anyone patiently listens and delegates,
how much more should we do so, especially since we're all so imperfect and limited?
Are you a family head or an elder in the congregation, or do you have another responsible position in the organization?
If so, you can imitate Jehovah by not micromanaging others, be willing to delegate tasks to them and listen to their suggestions,
imitate Jehovah's example of dignifying others and wanting to help them succeed.
Besides pleasing Jehovah, we have other good reasons to be modest.
Modesty helps us to be joyful, how so, by going hand in hand with a related quality gratitude.
A faithful brother who worked in the writing department for some 50 years was fond of saying,
only a grateful person can be happy.
If we're modestly aware of our limitations, we'll be grateful and happy for the help that we receive from others.
For example, think of the leper who returned to thank Jesus for healing him.
This man realized his limitations.
He was very thankful that Jesus had done something for him that he could never have done on his own.
Another reason to cultivate modesty is that it promotes good relationships with others.
Let's face it, people aren't usually drawn to those who think,
if I want something done right, I have to do it myself.
But they usually appreciate it when they're shown that we have confidence in them.
This in turn draws them to us.
Another way that modesty promotes good relationships is that it helps us to avoid comparing ourselves to others,
comparing ourselves to others is always a dangerous road to navigate.
Just think, for example, of Jesus' apostles who argued many times over who was the greatest,
or Joseph's brothers, and the terrible things they did because of being jealous of Joseph.
A modest person doesn't obsess over his perceived rank in comparison with others.
In this regard, we can remember the good example of Moses.
How did he react when Jehovah enabled some of his fellow Israelites to begin acting as prophets alongside him?
Moses rejoiced, saying that he wished all of Jehovah's people were prophets.
Moses didn't feel that he was the only one who should have such a privilege.
Finally, modesty promotes good relationships with others because it prevents us from bragging about our accomplishments
or drawing undue attention to ourselves which could stir up resentment in others.
So now we know what modesty is and why we want to have it.
This brings us to our third main point.
How can we cultivate this beautiful quality?
One thing we can do is to read and meditate on Bible examples both good and bad, such as those we just discussed.
Other Bible examples include Daniel, who modestly didn't take credit for the interpretation of King Nebuchadnezzar's dream.
The lesson for us?
If we're privileged to have a teaching assignment, or we enjoy a measure of success in the ministry,
we want to give all the glory to Jehovah.
We should modestly recognize that we couldn't do these things without his help.
We can also study the example of Jesus, who didn't even think of trying to grasp for more authority than Jehovah had granted him.
Philippians 2 and verse 6 tells us,
He gave no consideration to a seizure, namely that he should be equal to God.
Consider how Jesus responded when his disciples James and John approached him with their mother and asked for a privilege that was beyond his authority to grant them.
Jesus modestly acknowledged that only Jehovah could decide who would sit at his right and left hand in the kingdom.
Jesus respected his limitations.
What are some other ways we can cultivate modesty?
One is to apply the Bible's counsel founded 1 Corinthians 4 verse 6.
Do not go beyond the things that are written.
This refers primarily to the things written in God's Word.
By extension, the principal also applies to the scriptural direction that we receive from our publications.
When asked for advice, we would never want to impose our own opinion or simply give an answer off the top of our head.
Rather, we want to direct attention to the counsel found in the Bible and Bible-based publications.
Another way we can cultivate modesty is by asking for frank comments from a trusted friend as to whether or not we have a reputation for being modest.
In this regard, we remember the Bible principle as iron sharpens iron so one man sharpens his friend.
If someone is willing to offer kind observations about how we can improve, we wouldn't want to bristle at the comments.
Granted, it may sting our pride to hear such honest feedback, but don't we all need to hear these things from time to time?
As imperfect humans, each one of us has blind spots as it were.
It's hard to see ourselves the way others see us.
Remember, we can work to improve our Christian personality, but only if we know the areas that could use some improvement.
We can't change what we don't see.
A word of caution. We want to be aware of false modesty.
Remember that it's not about simply appearing modest, but actually being modest at heart.
To help us examine ourselves, we might meditate on questions like these.
When I receive advice or counsel, how do I really feel about it at heart?
Does my internal reaction depend on whether the person giving it has less or more experience or authority than I do?
Am I willing to accept valid suggestions regardless of who offers them?
A final way we can develop true modesty is to ask Jehovah to help us.
We know what James 1 verse 17 says.
Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, coming down from the father of the celestial lights.
Since modesty is one of Jehovah's good gifts to us, we can be sure that if we pray to Jehovah and ask him to help us cultivate this quality, he'll answer our sincere prayers.
In review, what is modesty? It's a proper recognition of our limitations.
Why do we want to have this quality? Because it pleases Jehovah.
It promotes good relationships with others, and it adds to our joy.
How can we cultivate modesty? There are many ways.
We can meditate on Bible examples both good and bad, and then apply the lessons in our own life.
We should apply the counsel to not go beyond the things written.
We can ask others for honest feedback on how we're doing and showing this quality, and above all, we can pray to Jehovah and ask him to help us develop it more fully.
When we think of all the positive ways that modesty benefits ourselves and others, wouldn't you agree that it truly is a quality that comes from what is good?